Modify S3394(COBOL): Migrate to LayC (#3376)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S3394/cobol/rule.adoc

This vulnerability allows corrupted data to be stored and causes errors in
parts of the code that are supposed to use this encrypted data.

== Why is this an issue?

The `ACCEPT` statement causes data entered at the console or provided by the
operating system to be made available to the program in a specific data

> element, without any validation or cleanup.

Author: ```suggestion
element, without any validation or sanitization.
```

Thus, if this data is accepted in a particular format and used by other
procedures, the system is vulnerable to attack or malfunction.

=== What is the potential impact?

The lack of data validation and error checking when using the ACCEPT keyword in
COBOL can lead to a number of security problems.

==== Data integrity problems

Without any form of validation, the ACCEPT keyword can store arbitrary input
data, even if it does not conform to the expected format or type. This can lead
to data corruption, causing the program to behave unpredictably, crash, or
corrupt customer data.

> ==== Intrusion attacks

Author: ```suggestion
==== Injection attacks
```

Malicious users can enter data that contains commands or queries that are then
executed by other procedures. This can lead to unauthorized access, data leaks,
or intrusions.

==== Denial of Service (DoS) attacks

An attacker could exploit this vulnerability to overload the system with large
amounts of data or special characters, causing the program to slow down or even
stop working, resulting in a denial of service.

== How to fix it

=== Code examples

In this specific example, `USER-INPUT` is expected to be numeric by the system.

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cobol,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
PROGRAM-ID. EXAMPLE.

DATA DIVISION.
WORKING-STORAGE SECTION.

> 01 USER-INPUT PIC X(4).

Reviewer: The program is invalid, so I suggest to make it valid:

01 WS-NUMERIC PIC X VALUE 'N'.
```suggestion
01 WS-NUMERIC PIC X VALUE 'N'.
01 USER-INPUT PIC X(4).
```

PROCEDURE DIVISION.
EXAMPLE-PROCEDURE.
    MOVE 'N' TO WS-NUMERIC.
    PERFORM UNTIL WS-NUMERIC = 'Y'
        DISPLAY 'ENTER YOUR 4 DIGIT RECORD NUMBER: ' NO ADVANCING
        ACCEPT USER-INPUT FROM CONSOLE *> Noncompliant
        MOVE 'Y' TO WS-NUMERIC
    END-PERFORM
    STOP RUN.
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cobol,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
PROGRAM-ID. EXAMPLE.

DATA DIVISION.
WORKING-STORAGE SECTION.
01 WS-NUMERIC PIC X VALUE 'N'.
01 USER-INPUT PIC X(4).

PROCEDURE DIVISION.
EXAMPLE-PROCEDURE.
    MOVE 'N' TO WS-NUMERIC.
    PERFORM UNTIL WS-NUMERIC = 'Y'
        DISPLAY 'ENTER YOUR 4 DIGIT RECORD NUMBER: ' NO ADVANCING
        ACCEPT USER-INPUT FROM CONSOLE
        IF USER-INPUT IS NUMERIC THEN
            MOVE 'Y' TO WS-NUMERIC
        ELSE
            DISPLAY 'INVALID INPUT. PLEASE ENTER A NUMERIC VALUE.'
        END-IF
    END-PERFORM
    STOP RUN.
----

> === How does that work?

Author: ```suggestion
=== How does this work?
```

To mitigate the risks associated with the ACCEPT keyword in COBOL, you should
implement data validation and error checking, or directly avoid using `ACCEPT`
altogether.

==== Data Validation Routines

> Before using the ACCEPT keyword to store data, validate the data using custom
> routines. These routines should check if the data meets the expected format and
> type. For example, if you're expecting a date, the routine should check if the
> input data is indeed a date.

Author: ```suggestion
Before using the data coming from ACCEPT, validate the data using custom
routines. These routines should check if the data meets the expected format and
type. For example, if you're expecting a number, the routine should check if the
input data is indeed a number.
```

== Resources

> * OWASP - https://owasp.org/Top10/A03_2021-Injection/[Top 10 2021 Category A3] - Injection
> * OWASP - https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/2017/A1_2017-Injection[Top 10 2017 Category A1] - Injection

Reviewer: The links are not properly formatted.

```suggestion
* OWASP - https://owasp.org/Top10/A03_2021-Injection/[Top 10 2021 Category A3 - Injection]
* OWASP - https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/2017/A1_2017-Injection[Top 10 2017 Category A1 - Injection]
```

> * OWASP - https://owasp.org/Top10/A03_2021-Injection/[OWASP Top 10 2021 Category A3] - Injection
> * OWASP - https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/2017/A1_2017-Injection[OWASP Top 10 2017 Category A1] - Injection

Author: ```suggestion
* OWASP - https://owasp.org/Top10/A03_2021-Injection/[Top 10 2021 Category A3] - Injection
* OWASP - https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/2017/A1_2017-Injection[Top 10 2017 Category A1] - Injection
```
